while our brains get swamped with
information about patterns and color
through Callie's eyes fast movement
trumps everything
as she stalks the flies her eyes send
signals to the brains visual cortex
which analyzes what's changed between
one picture and the next up to 70 times
every second
faster than the human brain
and a far bigger proportion of the
neurons in Callie's brain are dedicated
purely to the detection of movement
she almost can't help but pounce
cats wild ancestors relied on low-light
vision and the ability to detect
movement to stalk prey but these
evolutionary adaptations have a downside
cats can't focus on anything closer than
around 30 centimeters in front of them
but where their eyes fail them cats have
another perfectly adapted sense to go in
for the kill
the team has set up an experiment to
reveal just how our cat's secret weapon
works so the camera can do in full HD
resolution up to 2,700 frames per second
I was thought 20 30 times John Bradshaw
is hoping these ultra-high speed cameras
will capture this extraordinary sensory
organ in action it really is very very
quick I've seen still photographs of it
happening but there's nothing like
actually seeing the whole motion so I
think we got it there but it's very very
very quick John's trying to observe the
cat's whiskers as they move forward into
the Attack Position let's just take the
toy away for a second and that's can we
have a look at what we've just taken ok
so here we go the cat realizes the
masses within his grass but he wants to
know exactly where it is in relation to
his mass its eyes give up because they
can't focus very close that's where the
whiskers take over
so we can see here is the whiskers
suddenly being swept forward and now the
claws are coming into action so we got
here look the whiskers are pointing
almost directly in front of the cat's
nose in fact he's catching them with his
claws as he sweeps around trying to
catch the mouse but the little muscles
at the base of each whisker are really
tugging hard to swing those forward
completely out of the normal position
this really extraordinarily detailed
I've never expected to see all of this
it's all seems to take place in about a
fifth of a second which just shows how
fast cats reflexes really are from the
point where they sweep the whiskers
forward where the muscles contract and
then relax back and the whiskers spring
back again the mouse doesn't have a
chance
far thicker and longer than normal hairs
whiskers also sit three times deeper in
the skin where they attach to nerve
endings telling the cat how far each one
is being bent back and how quickly their
whiskers are the same width as their
body allowing cats to navigate the
narrowest spaces
you
cats also have whiskers above their eyes
and on their ankles sending them a
constant stream of information as they
sense the world around them